Add OpenSearch performance 2.17 blog (#3470)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2024-11-26-opensearch-performance-2.17.md

> 

Reviewer: This post covers performance improvements made through 2.17 with 1.3x as baseline. All comparisons are made against 1.3. We have given breakup of this performance against 2.14 at few places to give visibility since our last blog.

> 

Reviewer: This post covers performance improvements made through 2.17 with 1.3x as baseline. All comparisons are made against 1.3. We have given breakup of this performance against 2.14 at few places to give visibility since our last blog.

- **Date histograms**: OpenSearch 2.17 performance for date histograms has **improved by 97%** compared to OpenSearch 1.3, providing major speed improvements for time-series analysis.
- **Range queries**:  With **87% performance improvement** compared to OpenSearch 1.3, range queries now execute quicker using fewer resources.
- **Sorting and filtering**: OpenSearch 2.17 delivers faster sorting with **59% improvement** compared to OpenSearch 1.3, enhancing query performance for numeric and textual datasets.

The following table summarizes performance improvements for the preceding query types.

|	|
**Query Types**	|1.3.18	|2.7	|2.11	|2.12	|2.13	|2.14	|2.15	|2.16	|2.17	|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|
**Big 5 areas mean latency, ms
**	|
Text Query	|59.51	|47.91	|41.05	|27.29	|27.61	|27.85	|27.39	|21.7	|21.77	|
|
Sorting	|17.73	|11.24	|8.14	|7.99	|7.53	|7.47	|7.78	|7.22	|7.26	|
|
Terms Aggregation	|1730.71	|1351	|1316	|1228	|291	|293	|113	|112	|113	|
|
Range Queries	|26.08	|23.12	|16.91	|18.71	|17.33	|17.39	|18.51	|3.17	|3.17	|
|
Date Histogram	|6068	|5249	|5168	|469	|357	|146	|157	|164	|160	|

> |Aggregate (geo mean)	|195.96	|154.59	|130.9	|74.85	|51.84	|43.44	|37.07	|24.66	|24.63	|

Author: Yes but it's understood.

Text queries are fundamental to effective text search, especially in applications requiring fast and accurate document retrieval. OpenSearch 2.12 introduced the **match_only_text** field to address specific needs in analytics and applications prioritizing 100% recall or customized ranking strategies. This field type dramatically reduced index sizes and accelerated query execution by removing the complexity of relevance-based scoring. As a result, **text queries performed 47% faster compared to OpenSearch 2.11 and 57% faster than OpenSearch 1.3**.

With OpenSearch 2.17, we further amplified these performance gains. Building on the foundations of the **match_only_text** field, OpenSearch 2.17 optimizes text queries, achieving **21% faster performance compared to 2.14** and an overall **63% faster performance compared to 1.3**. These improvements stem from continued enhancements to query execution and index optimization. Applications relying on text search for analytics or high-recall use cases can now achieve faster results with reduced resource usage, making OpenSearch 2.17 an even more powerful choice for modern text search workloads.

### Term and multi-term aggregations 

> Term aggregations are crucial for slicing large datasets based on multiple criteria, making them important query operations for data analytics use cases. Building on prior advancements, **OpenSearch 2.17** enhances the efficiency of global term aggregations, using term frequency optimizations to handle large immutable collections, such as log data, with unprecedented speed. 

Author: ```suggestion
Term aggregations are crucial for slicing large datasets based on multiple criteria, making them important query operations for data analytics use cases. Building on prior advancements, OpenSearch 2.17 enhances the efficiency of global term aggregations, using term frequency optimizations to handle large immutable collections, such as log data, with unprecedented speed. 
```

Filtering has also seen a significant advancement with the introduction of **[Roaring Bitmap encoding](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/14774)** for handling large filter lists. This approach minimizes memory and network overhead by compressing filter data into efficient bitmap structures. It is particularly effective for high-cardinality scenarios, such as filtering a product catalog by items owned by a specific customer. The bitmap-based filters can be stored and seamlessly joined with the main index at query time. Tests demonstrate that this method maintains **low latency** even with extensive filters, making it a scalable and high-performing alternative to traditional terms queries or lookup strategies. These improvements ensure that OpenSearch 2.17 delivers faster and more efficient sorting and filtering for diverse use cases, from search to large-scale analytics.

> 

Reviewer: Its terms query: https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/query-dsl/term/terms/

* **[Smarter query planning](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/12390)**: Optimizing where and how computations run ensures we reduce unnecessary data transfer and improve performance for parallel query execution.
* **[gRPC-based Search API](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15190)**: We're enhancing client-server communication with Protobuf and gRPC, accelerating search by reducing overhead.
* **[Query performance optimization](https://github.com/orgs/opensearch-project/projects/153)**: Improving performance remains our priority, and several key initiatives such as docId encoding and query approximation will reduce index size and enhance performance of large-range queries.
* **[Star-Tree indexing](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/12498)**: Precomputing aggregations using Star-Tree indexing ensures faster, more predictable performance for aggregation-heavy queries.

### Vector search

In 2025, we will continue to invest in the following key initiatives aimed at performance improvements and cost savings:

> * **Index build acceleration with GPUs and SIMD:** k-NN performance can be enhanced by using libraries with GPU support. Because vector distance calculations are compute-heavy, GPUs can speed up computations and enhance the performance of index build time and search queries.

Author: ```suggestion
* **Index build acceleration with GPUs and SIMD:** k-NN performance can be enhanced by using libraries with GPU support. Because vector distance calculations are compute-heavy, GPUs can speed up computations and reduce index build and search query times.
```

> * **Autotuning k-NN indexes:** OpenSearch's vector database offers a toolkit of algorithms tailored for diverse workloads. In 2025, our primary goal is to enhance the out-of-the-box experience by autotuning hyperparameters and settings based on access patterns and hardware resources.

Author: ```suggestion
* **Autotuning k-NN indexes:** OpenSearch's vector database offers a toolkit of algorithms tailored for diverse workloads. In 2025, our goal is to enhance the out-of-the-box experience by autotuning hyperparameters and settings based on access patterns and hardware resources.
```

These achievements are made possible through collaboration with the broader OpenSearch community, whose contributions in testing, feedback, and development have been invaluable. Together, we are building a robust and efficient search and analytics engine capable of addressing current and future challenges.

Stay connected to our [_blog_](https://opensearch.org/blog) and [_GitHub_](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch) for ongoing updates and insights as we continue this journey of innovation and share future plans.

## Appendix: Benchmarking tests and results

This section outlines the performance benchmarks and results achieved using OpenSearch Benchmark to evaluate the Big5 workload across various OpenSearch versions and configurations. 

### Benchmark Setup

- **Benchmarking tool**: OpenSearch Benchmark, our standard benchmarking tool used in prior evaluations.  
- **Instance type**: *c5.2xlarge* (8 vCPU, 16 GB RAM), chosen as a mid-tier option to avoid masking resource efficiency gains with oversized instances.  
- **Cluster configuration**: Single-node cluster for reproducibility and ease of setup.  

> - **Index setup**: Big5 Index configured with one shard and no replicas (`--workload-params="number_of_replicas:0"`).  

Author: ```suggestion
- **Index setup**: A Big5 Index configured with one shard and no replicas (`--workload-params="number_of_replicas:0"`).  
```

> - **Corpus details**: 100 GB dataset with 116 million documents. The storage size after ingestion was 24 GB for the primary shard.  After removing overheads like doc values, the RSS is expected to be around 8 GB, matching the JVM heap size for the instance. Keeping most of the data in memory ensures a more accurate evaluation of performance improvements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Corpus details**: A 100 GB dataset with 116 million documents. The storage size after ingestion was 24 GB for the primary shard. After removing overheads like doc values, the RSS is expected to be around 8 GB, matching the JVM heap size for the instance. Keeping most of the data in memory ensures a more accurate evaluation of performance improvements.
```

- **Ingestion**: Conducted with a single bulk indexing client to ensure that data is ingested in chronological order.
- **Merge policy**:  
  - LogByteSizeMergePolicy for OpenSearch 2.11.0 and later.  
  - TieredMergePolicy for OpenSearch 1.3.18 and 2.7.0.  
- **Test mode**: Tests were run in [benchmarking mode](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/benchmark/user-guide/target-throughput/#benchmarking-mode) (`target-throughput` disabled) so that the OpenSearch client sent requests to the OpenSearch cluster as fast as possible. 

### Key notes and considerations

> - **Additional queries**: The Big5 workload was recently updated to include additional queries. These queries have been incorporated in the results of this blog. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Additional queries**: The Big5 workload was recently updated to include additional queries. These queries have been incorporated into the results of this blog post. 
```

> - **`multi_terms-keyword` support**:  OpenSearch 1.3.18 and 2.7.0 recorded `0` ms service time for `multi_terms-keyword`. This is because `multi_terms-keyword` was not supported until OS 2.11.0. Thus, entries in **Mean latency** account for this by excluding `multi_terms-keyword` from the geometric mean computation for OS 1.3.18 and OS 2.7.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`multi_terms-keyword` support**: OpenSearch 1.3.18 and 2.7.0 recorded `0` ms service time for `multi_terms-keyword`. This is because `multi_terms-keyword` was not supported until OpenSearch 2.11.0. Thus, entries in **Mean latency** account for this by excluding `multi_terms-keyword` from the geometric mean computation for OpenSearch 1.3.18 and 2.7.0.  
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 228: "incorporated into" => "included in"?
Line 229: Fine to use "OS" in tables, but not in the text, please.

The following table provides benchmarking test results.

|**Buckets**	|Query	|Order	|OS 1.3.18 p90 service time (ms)	|OS 2.7 p90 service time (ms)	|OS 2.11.1 p90 service time (ms)	|OS 2.12.0 p90 service time (ms)	|OS 2.13.0 p90 service time (ms)	|OS 2.14 p90 service time (ms)	|OS 2.15 p90 service time (ms)	|OS 2.16 p90 service time (ms)	|OS 2.17 p90 service time (ms)	|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|

> |Text Query	|query-string-on-message	|1	|332.75	|280	|276	|78.25	|80	|77.75	|77.25	|77.75	|78	|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Text query	|query-string-on-message	|1	|332.75	|280	|276	|78.25	|80	|77.75	|77.25	|77.75	|78	|
```

|query-string-on-message-filtered	|2	|67.25	|47	|30.25	|46.5	|47.5	|46	|46.75	|29.5	|30	|
|query-string-on-message-filtered-sorted-num	|3	|125.25	|102	|85.5	|41	|41.25	|41	|40.75	|24	|24.5	|

> |term	|4	|4	|3.75	|4	|4	|4	|4	|4	|4	|4	|

Reviewer 2: "Term" (capitalized)?

|Sorting	|asc_sort_timestamp	|5	|9.75	|15.75	|7.5	|7	|7	|7	|7	|7	|7	|
|asc_sort_timestamp_can_match_shortcut	|6	|13.75	|7	|7	|6.75	|6	|6.25	|6.5	|6	|6.25	|
|asc_sort_timestamp_no_can_match_shortcut	|7	|13.5	|7	|7	|6.5	|6	|6	|6.5	|6	|6.25	|
|asc_sort_with_after_timestamp	|8	|35	|33.75	|238	|212	|197.5	|213.5	|204.25	|160.5	|185.25	|
|desc_sort_timestamp	|9	|12.25	|39.25	|6	|7	|5.75	|5.75	|5.75	|6	|6	|
|desc_sort_timestamp_can_match_shortcut	|10	|7	|120.5	|5	|5.5	|5	|4.75	|5	|5	|5	|
|desc_sort_timestamp_no_can_match_shortcut	|11	|6.75	|117	|5	|5	|4.75	|4.5	|4.75	|5	|5	|
|desc_sort_with_after_timestamp	|12	|487	|33.75	|325.75	|358	|361.5	|385.25	|378.25	|320.25	|329.5	|
|sort_keyword_can_match_shortcut	|13	|291	|3	|3	|3.25	|3.5	|3	|3	|3	|3	|
|sort_keyword_no_can_match_shortcut	|14	|290.75	|3.25	|3	|3.5	|3.25	|3	|3.75	|3	|3.25	|
|sort_numeric_asc	|15	|7.5	|4.5	|4.5	|4	|4	|4	|4	|4	|4	|
|sort_numeric_asc_with_match	|16	|2	|1.75	|2	|2	|2	|2	|1.75	|2	|2	|
|sort_numeric_desc	|17	|8	|6	|6	|5.5	|4.75	|5	|4.75	|4.25	|4.5	|
|sort_numeric_desc_with_match	|18	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|1.75	|2	|2	|

> |Terms Aggregation	|cardinality-agg-high	|19	|3075.75	|2432.25	|2506.25	|2246	|2284.5	|2202.25	|2323.75	|2337.25	|2408.75	|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Terms aggregation	|cardinality-agg-high	|19	|3075.75	|2432.25	|2506.25	|2246	|2284.5	|2202.25	|2323.75	|2337.25	|2408.75	|
```

> |cardinality-agg-low	|20	|2925.5	|2295.5	|2383	|2126	|2245.25	|2159	|3	|3	|3	|

Reviewer 2: Line 253: Same comment re: Term/Terms

|composite_terms-keyword	|21	|466.75	|378.5	|407.75	|394.5	|353.5	|366	|350	|346.5	|350.25	|
|composite-terms	|22	|290	|242	|263	|252	|233	|228.75	|229	|223.75	|226	|
|keyword-terms	|23	|4695.25	|3478.75	|3557.5	|3220	|29.5	|26	|25.75	|26.25	|26.25	|
|keyword-terms-low-cardinality	|24	|4699.5	|3383	|3477.25	|3249.75	|25	|22	|21.75	|21.75	|21.75	|
|multi_terms-keyword	|25	|0*	|0*	|854.75	|817.25	|796.5	|748	|768.5	|746.75	|770	|

> |Range Queries	|keyword-in-range	|26	|101.5	|100	|18	|22	|23.25	|26	|27.25	|18	|17.75	|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Range queries	|keyword-in-range	|26	|101.5	|100	|18	|22	|23.25	|26	|27.25	|18	|17.75	|
```

> |range	|27	|85	|77	|14.5	|18.25	|20.25	|22.75	|24.25	|13.75	|14.25	|

Reviewer 2: "Range" (capitalized)?

|range_field_conjunction_big_range_big_term_query	|28	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|
|range_field_conjunction_small_range_big_term_query	|29	|2	|1.75	|2	|2	|2	|2	|1.5	|2	|2	|
|range_field_conjunction_small_range_small_term_query	|30	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|
|range_field_disjunction_big_range_small_term_query	|31	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2.25	|
|range-agg-1	|32	|4641.25	|3810.75	|3745.75	|3578.75	|3477.5	|3328.75	|3318.75	|2	|2.25	|
|range-agg-2	|33	|4568	|3717.25	|3669.75	|3492.75	|3403.5	|3243.5	|3235	|2	|2.25	|
|range-numeric	|34	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|2	|

> |Date Histogram	|composite-date_histogram-daily	|35	|4828.75	|4055.5	|4051.25	|9	|3	|2.5	|3	|2.75	|2.75	|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Date histogram	|composite-date_histogram-daily	|35	|4828.75	|4055.5	|4051.25	|9	|3	|2.5	|3	|2.75	|2.75	|
```

has_science_table: true
excerpt: Learn more about the strategic enhancements and performance features that OpenSearch has delivered up to version 2.17.
featured_blog_post: false
featured_image: false
additional_author_info: We sincerely appreciate the contributions to this blog from Anandhi Bumstead, Carl Meadows, Jon Handler, Dagney Braun, Michael Froh, Kunal Khatua, Andrew Ross, Harsha Vamsi, Bowen Lan, Rishabh Kumar Maurya, Sandesh Kumar, Marc Handalian, Rishabh Singh, Govind Kamat, Martin Gaievski, and Minal Shah.
---

Our commitment to enhancing OpenSearch's performance remains unwavering, and this blog post showcases the significant progress we've made. Recently, we've focused our investments on four key areas: text querying, vector storage and querying, ingestion and indexing, and storage efficiency. Additionally, we've published our search and performance roadmap, reaffirming that performance continues to be our top priority. In this blog post, we'll bring you up to date on our continuing performance improvements through [OpenSearch 2.17](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/blob/main/release-notes/opensearch-release-notes-2.17.0.md).

> OpenSearch 2.17 offers a remarkable **6x performance boost** compared to OpenSearch 1.3, enhancing key operations like text queries, term aggregations, range queries, date histograms, and sorting. Additionally, the improvements in semantic vector search now allow for highly configurable settings, enabling you to balance response time, accuracy, and cost according to your needs. These advancements are a testament to the dedicated community whose contributions and collaboration propel OpenSearch forward.

Reviewer 2: "terms" aggregations?

* **Autotuning k-NN indexes:** OpenSearch's vector database offers a toolkit of algorithms tailored for diverse workloads. In 2025, our goal is to enhance the out-of-the-box experience by autotuning hyperparameters and settings based on access patterns and hardware resources.
* **Cold-warm tiering:** In version 2.18, we added support for enabling vector search on remote snapshots. We will continue focusing on decoupling index read/write operations to extend vector indexes to different storage systems in order to reduce storage and compute costs.
* **Memory footprint reduction:** We will continue to aggressively reduce the memory footprint of vector indexes. One of our goals is to support the ability to partially load HNSW indexes into native engines. This complements our disk-optimized search and helps further reduce the operating costs of OpenSearch clusters.

> * **Reduced disk storage using derived source:** Currently, vector data is stored both in a doc-values-like format and in the stored `_source` field. The stored `_source` field can contribute more than 60% of the overall vector storage requirement. We plan to create a custom stored field format that will inject the vector fields into the source from the doc-values-like format, creating a dervied source field. In addition to storage savings, this approach will improve indexing throughput, reduce shard size, and even accelerate search.

Reviewer 2: Bullet title: Should "a" precede "derived source"? Penultimate sentence: "dervied" => "derived"

            <td>1404.5</td>
            <td>1340.25</td>
            <td>1113.75</td>
            <td>1001.25</td>
            <td>923</td>
            <td>36</td>
            <td>32.75</td>
            <td>35.25</td>
            <td>39.75</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>range-auto-date-histo</td>
            <td>38</td>
            <td>10373</td>
            <td>8686.75</td>
            <td>9940.25</td>
            <td>8696.75</td>
            <td>8199.75</td>
            <td>8214.75</td>
            <td>8278.75</td>
            <td>8306</td>
            <td>8293.75</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>range-auto-date-histo-with-metrics</td>
            <td>39</td>
            <td>22988.5</td>
            <td>20438</td>
            <td>20108.25</td>
            <td>20392.75</td>
            <td>20117.25</td>
            <td>19656.5</td>
            <td>19959.25</td>
            <td>20364.75</td>
            <td>20147.5</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

### Notes and considerations

- **Additional queries**: The Big5 workload was recently updated to include additional queries. These queries have been included in the results of this blog post. 

> - <sup>*</sup> **`multi_terms-keyword` support**: OpenSearch 1.3.18 and 2.7.0 recorded `0` ms service time for `multi_terms-keyword` . This is because `multi_terms-keyword` was not supported until OpenSearch 2.11.0. Thus, entries in **Mean latency** account for this by excluding `multi_terms-keyword` from the geometric mean computation for OpenSearch 1.3.18 and 2.7.0.

Reviewer 2: Remove extra spaces in between the first and second sentences.
